Initial draft of episode on collaborating (#22)
carpentries/lesson-development-training: episodes/24-collaborating.md

## Managing issues

**Issues** are GitHub's framework for managing issue/bug reports, feature requests, and lists of future work. They provide a single shared record of all the problems people have found with the lesson, along with solutions and discussions around them. This helps to keep track of issues for the team to work on later and avoids reports of issues you already know about.

When you create an issue, you can add a range of details to it. An issue can be assigned to a specific team member - this can be a helpful way to know who is currently working to fix an issue or a way to assign responsibility to someone to deal with it. You can assign one or more labels to issues to classify or group them. Labels can also be given colours, allowing you to see at a glance from the Issues page the state of your project. The default labels available in GitHub include:

> 

Reviewer: There aren't right now, but we could certainly implement them!

@fmichonneau, do you have a quick way of adding our standard labels to the repositories? I seem to remember carpenter having that capability.

> 

Reviewer 2: yes! we can use carpenter/[chisel](https://docs.carpentries.org/topic_folders/maintainers/github_labels.html#how-to-populate-a-github-repository-with-these-labels) for this. But, now that it's possible to set defaults issue labels in a repository (e.g., for [carpentries incubator](https://docs.carpentries.org/topic_folders/maintainers/github_labels.html#how-to-populate-a-github-repository-with-these-labels)), we haven't used this functionality very often

> 

Reviewer 3: @zkamvar would you be happy to take care of that for the two template repositories?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Managing communication

Having an open, publicly-visible list of all the issues with your project provides a helpful way of communicating with people external and internal to your project to let them know you are aware of issues and you are working on them. This also can be used as an indicator (to external people) that the project is active and 
(for internal team members) provide at a glance view of the state the project is in, making it easier to prioritise future work.

> As we have seen in the previous episode, GitHub's notifications framework **Mentions** plays an important part in communicating between collaborators and is used as a way of alerting team members of activities and referencing one issue/comment/pull requests from another.

Reviewer 3: I opened an issue for this https://github.com/carpentries/lesson-development-training/issues/24

GitHub's project management framework **Project Board** is a tool for keeping track of all the different components of a project, and what their current status is. It does this using columns and cards - you break your project down into tasks which you write on cards, then move the cards between columns that describe the status of each task. Cards are usually small, descriptive and self-contained tasks that build on each other. Breaking a project down into clearly-defined tasks makes it a lot easier to manage and develop. GitHub project boards interact and integrate with the other features of the site such as issues and pull requests - cards can be added to track the progress of such tasks and automatically moved between columns based on their progress or status.

GitHub provides template boards that by default contain the three ‘basic’ columns, with pretty self-explanatory names:

- `To Do`
- `In Progress`
- `Done`

> If you add an issue or pull request to a card in the board, it will be automatically be moved it to ‘Done’ for you when you close the issue or merge the pull request. One common extra column is `On hold` or `Waiting`. If you have tasks that get held up by waiting on other people (e.g. to respond to your questions) then moving them to a separate column makes their current state clearer. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you add an issue or pull request to a card in the board, it will automatically be moved it to ‘Done’ for you when you close the issue or merge the pull request. One common extra column is `On hold` or `Waiting`. If you have tasks that get held up by waiting on other people (e.g. to respond to your questions) then moving them to a separate column makes their current state clearer. 
```

Once your project board has a large number of cards on it, you might want to begin priorisiting them. Not all tasks are going to be equally important, and some will require others to be completed before they can even be begun. Common methods of prioritisation include:

- **Vertical position**: the vertical arrangement of cards in a column implicitly represents their importance. High-priority bugs go to the top of `To Do`, whilst tasks that depend on others go beneath them. This is the easiest one to implement, though you have to remember to correctly place cards when you add them.
- **Priority columns**: instead of a single `To Do` column, you can have two or more, for example - `To Do: Low Priority` and `To Do: High Priority`. When adding a card, you pick which is the appropriate column for it. You can even add a Triage column for newly-added issues that you’ve not yet had time to classify. This format works well for project boards devoted to bugs.

> - **Labels**: if you convert each card into an issue, then you can label them with their priority - remember GitHub lets you create custom labels and set their colours. Green for low, orange for medium and red for high priority labels make for a very visually clear indication, but require the most admin work as each card has to be an issue to be assigned a label.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Labels**: if you convert each card into an issue, then you can label them with their priority - remember GitHub lets you create custom labels and set their colours. Labels can provide a very visually clear indication of issue priority but require more administrative work on the project, as each card has to be an issue to be assigned a label.
```

Reviewer 3: @anenadic having a go at resolving the colour blindness issue here.

> - **Labels**: if you convert each card into an issue, then you can label them with their priority - remember GitHub lets you create custom labels and setting their colours. Green low, orange medium and red high priority labels make for a very visually clear indication, but require the most admin work as each card has to be an issue to be assigned a label.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Labels**: if you convert each card into an issue, then you can label them with their priority - remember GitHub lets you create custom labels and set their colours. Green for low, orange for medium and red for high priority labels make for a very visually clear indication, but require the most admin work as each card has to be an issue to be assigned a label.
```

Reviewer 3: > make for a very visually clear indication

Perhaps not for people with colour blindness?

Author: Maybe we should leave out suggestions as to what colours use to indicate the priority - or mention the traffic light system but warn about it accessibility for colour blind users.

## Project governance

In addition to managing your project on a day-to-day basis, you should consider a governance model for your lesson to describe the ground rules of participation, the roles that project participants can take on and the process for decision making within the project. You may wonder why you'd ever need a formal governance process - after all, everyone in your team is collegial, polite and hard-working. However, even among the most harmonious teams you will likely realise you need an agreed way to make decisions and resolve conflicts when your team encounters their first real disagreement.

> The moment your collaborator group exceeds 3 or 4 members (and fewer if the collaborators do not all know each other equally well at the outset) you should establish and document some kind of governance process. It will help mitigate any power imbalances which are expressed when one team member (or a group of team members) are more vocal and are able to dominate the decision-making process. It is advised to make these considerations early on, before your project grows too much and introducing structure and process into it becomes more difficult and complicated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The moment your collaborator group exceeds 3 or 4 members (and fewer if the collaborators do not all know each other equally well at the outset) you should establish and document some kind of governance process. It will help mitigate any power imbalances which are expressed when one team member (or a group of team members) are more vocal and are able to dominate the decision-making process. It is advised to make these considerations early on, before your project grows too much and introducing structure and process into it becomes more difficult and complicated. Besides, if you do not establish these processes from the start, you are likely to discover the need to do so only when you first encounter disagreement within the team: a situation unlikely to provide perfect conditions for a discussion of governance.
```

> Here are some aspects of governing a project that you should consider, borrowed from ["Working in teams"](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html) chapter of ["Research Software Engineering with Python"](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/index.html) book on how to work productively in small teams where everyone is welcome:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here are some aspects of governing a project that you should consider. These are borrowed from [the _Working in teams_ chapter](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html) of [_Research Software Engineering with Python_](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/index.html), a book on how to work productively in small teams where everyone is welcome:
```

- [establish a Code of Conduct](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html#teams-coc)
- [meeting rules](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html#teams-meetings)
- [decision-making process](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html#teams-martha)
- [handling conflict](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html#teams-conflict)
- [making all the above obvious to newcomers](https://merely-useful.tech/py-rse/teams.html#teams-documentation)

For some other examples and inspirations of governance processes, consider the following:

- [Martha’s Rules](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/088610998600100206) for discussing and deciding on issues in group meetings (if you cannot access the publication, see [Greg Wilson's explanation of Martha's rules](https://third-bit.com/files/2020/08/marthas/))

> - [GitHub's Minimum Viable Governance](https://github.com/github/MVG) (MVG) for establishing a lightweight governance process into free and open source projects that are run in version control systems. In MVG decisions are made through consensus of the project maintainers or determined based on the maintainers' consideration of a number of factors in "good faith"" (when explicit agreement of all maintainers cannot be reached). In reality, consensus-based governance can run you into trouble when you hit an issue where maintainers do not all agree but still want to make progress. Also, "good faith" definition is open to interpretation and leaves plenty of room for the powerful to still get away with acting in bad faith. A voting/majority system may help you get around this issue. MVG is designed for a one organisation-many projects setup and is too elaborate for a single lesson project. However, it includes boilerplates for a steering committee, charter, governance, Code of Conduct documents, and language laying out a preference for consensus but with voting as a fallback, and other templates that may be helpful for those starting out and unsure about how to get on with establishing a governance process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [GitHub's Minimum Viable Governance](https://github.com/github/MVG) (MVG) for establishing a lightweight governance process into free and open source projects that are run in version control systems. In MVG decisions are made through consensus of the project maintainers or determined based on the maintainers' consideration of a number of factors in "good faith"" (when explicit agreement of all maintainers cannot be reached). In reality, consensus-based governance can run you into trouble when you hit an issue where maintainers do not all agree but still want to make progress. Also, the definition of "good faith" is open to interpretation and leaves plenty of room for people, especially the powerful, to get away with acting in bad faith. A system based on voting and majorities may help you get around this issue. MVG is designed for a one organisation-many projects setup and is too elaborate for a single lesson project. However, it includes "boilerplate" template files for a steering committee, charter, governance, Code of Conduct documents, and language laying out a preference for consensus but with voting as a fallback, and other templates that may be helpful for those starting out and unsure about how to get on with establishing a governance process.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [This list of resources related to community governance](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k8t1VPdcwKH7ZGaCA0q8NNxbFKQKkZGPth3nhfkKwAA/edit#gid=1287139202) from [The Center for Scientific Collaboration and Community Engagement](https://cscce.org) provides a collection of links to further reading material on this topic. It includes various guides, blog posts, and examples of community governance that may inform the discussions and decisions for your project.
```
